Robust ABC (ActionScript Bytecode) [Dis-]Assembler
==================================================

[RABCDAsm][] is a collection of utilities including an ActionScript 3 
assembler/disassembler, and a few tools to manipulate SWF files. These are:

 * `rabcdasm` - ABC disassembler
 * `rabcasm` - ABC assembler
 * `abcexport` - extracts ABC from SWF files
 * `abcreplace` - replaces ABC in SWF files
 * `swfdecompress` - decompresses zlib-compressed SWF files
 * `swf7zcompress` - (re-)compress the contents of a SWF using 7-Zip
 * `swflzmacompress` - compress the contents of a SWF using LZMA
 * `swfbinexport` / `swfbinreplace` - extract/replace contents of binary data 
   tags from SWF files

`abcexport` and `abcreplace` are reimplementations of similar utilities from 
my [swfutilsex][] Java package, however these work faster as they do not parse 
the SWF files as deeply.  
`swfdecompress` is ancillary and is only useful for debugging and studying of 
the SWF file format, and not required for ABC manipulation. It is functionally 
equivalent to [flasm][]'s `-x` option. If you frequently work on compressed 
SWF files, you may want to decompress them to speed processing up.  
`swf7zcompress` is an utility to further reduce the size of SWF files. It uses 
[7-Zip][] to compress the data better than the standard zlib library would. It 
requires that the `7z` command-line program be installed and in `PATH`.  
`swflzmacompress` compresses SWF files using the [LZMA][] algorithm, support 
for which was introduced in Flash 11. It will only work with SWF files with 
version 13 or higher.  
`swfbinexport` and `swfbinreplace` aid in the manipulation of 
`DefineBinaryData` tags in SWF files (some files may contain nested SWF files 
stored in these tags).

  [RABCDAsm]: http://github.com/CyberShadow/RABCDAsm
  [swfutilsex]: http://github.com/CyberShadow/swfutilsex
  [flasm]: http://flasm.sourceforge.net/
  [7-Zip]: http://www.7-zip.org/
  [LZMA]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lempel-Ziv-Markov_chain_algorithm

Motivation and goals
--------------------

This package was created due to lack of similar software out there. 
Particularly, I needed an utility which would allow me to edit ActionScript 3 
bytecode with the following properties:

 1. Speed. Less waiting means more productivity. `rabcasm` can assemble large 
    projects (>200000 LOC) in under a second on modern machines.
 2. Comfortably-editable output. Each class is decompiled to its own file, 
    with files arranged in subdirectories representing the package hierarchy. 
    Class files are `#include`d from the main file.
 3. Most importantly - robustness! If the Adobe AVM can load and run the file, 
    then it must be editable - no matter if the file is obfuscated or 
    otherwise mutilated to prevent reverse-engineering. RABCDAsm achieves this 
    by using a textual representation closer to the ABC file format, rather 
    than to what an ActionScript compiler would generate.

Compiling from source
---------------------

RABCDAsm is written in the [D programming language, version 2][d2].

Assuming you have [git][] and a D2 compiler, such as [dmd][] or [gdc][] 
installed, compiling should be as straight-forward as:

    git clone git://github.com/CyberShadow/RABCDAsm.git
    cd RABCDAsm
    dmd -run build_rabcdasm.d

Substitute `dmd` with `gdmd` if you're using gdc. You can use the `DC` and 
`DCFLAGS` environment variables to override the detected compiler and default 
compilation flags (`-O -inline`).

To be able to manipulate SWF files packed with LZMA compression, you'll need 
to have the [liblzma library][] and development files installed on your system. If you download the precompiled binaries, you will need the 32 bit version of the dll (in the i486 folder).

  [d2]: http://dlang.org/
  [dmd]: http://www.digitalmars.com/d/download.html
  [gdc]: http://bitbucket.org/goshawk/gdc/
  [git]: http://git-scm.com/
  [liblzma library]: http://tukaani.org/xz/

Pre-compiled binaries
---------------------

You can find pre-compiled Windows binaries on [my website][downloads]. 
However, please don't expect them to be up-to-date with the latest source 
versions.

  [downloads]: http://files.thecybershadow.net/RABCDAsm/

Usage
-----

To begin hacking on a SWF file:

    abcexport file.swf

This will create `file-0.abc` ... `file-N.abc` (often just `file-0.abc`). Each 
file corresponds to an ABC block inside the SWF file.

To disassemble one of the `.abc` files:

    rabcdasm file-0.abc

This will create a `file-0` directory, which will contain `file-0.main.asasm` 
(the main program file) and files for ActionScript scripts, classes, and 
orphan and script-level methods.

To assemble the `.asasm` files back, and update the SWF file:

    rabcasm file-0/file-0.main.asasm
    abcreplace file.swf 0 file-0/file-0.main.abc

The second `abcreplace` argument represents the index of the ABC block in the 
SWF file, and corresponds to the number in the filename created by `abcexport`.

`swfbinexport` and `swfbinreplace` are used in the same manner as `abcexport` 
and `abcreplace`.

Syntax
======

The syntax of the disassembly was designed to be very simple and allow fast 
and easy parsing. It is a close representation of the `.abc` file format, and 
thus it is somewhat verbose. All constant pool elements (signed/unsigned 
integers, doubles, strings, namespaces, namespace sets, multinames) are always 
*expanded inline*, for ease of editing. Similarly, classes, instances, methods 
and method bodies are also defined inline, in the context of their "parent" 
object. By-index references of classes and methods (used in the `newclass`, 
`newfunction` and `callstatic` instructions) are represented via 
automatically-generated unique "reference strings", declared as `refid` fields.

If you haven't yet, I strongly recommend that you look through Adobe's 
[ActionScript Virtual Machine 2 (AVM2) Overview][avm2]. You will most likely 
need to consult it for the instruction reference anyway (although you can also 
use [this handy list][avm2i] as well). You will find it difficult to 
understand the disassembly without good understanding of concepts such as 
namespaces and multinames.

  [avm2]: http://www.adobe.com/devnet-archive/actionscript/articles/avm2overview.pdf
  [avm2i]: http://www.anotherbigidea.com/javaswf/avm2/AVM2Instructions.html

Overview
--------

In order to guarantee unambiguity and data preservation, all strings read from 
the input file - including identifiers (variable/function/class names) - are 
represented as string literals. Thus, the syntax does not have any "reserved 
words" or such - an unrecognized word is treated as an error, not as an 
identifier.

Whitespace (outside string literals, of course) is completely ignored, except 
where required to separate words. Comments are Intel-assembler-style: a single 
`;` demarks a comment until the next end-of-line. Control directives (such as 
`#include`) are allowed anywhere where whitespace is allowed.

The syntax is comprised of hierarchical blocks. Each block contains a number 
of fields - starting with a keyword specifying the field type. A block is 
terminated with the `end` keyword. Some fields contain a limited number of 
parameters, and others are, or contain blocks.

Hierarchy
---------

The topmost block in the hierarchy is the `program` block. This must be the 
first block in the file (thus, `program` must be the first word in the file as 
well). The `program` block contains `script` fields, and `class` / `method` 
fields for "orphan" classes and methods (not owned by other objects in the 
hierarchy). Orphan methods are usually anonymous functions. The file version 
is also specified in the `program` block, using the `minorversion` and 
`majorversion` fields (both unsigned integers).

`script` blocks have one mandatory `sinit` field (the script initialization 
method) and `trait` fields.

A "trait" can be one of several kinds. The kind is specified right after the 
`trait` keyword, followed by the trait name (a multiname). Following the name 
are the trait fields, varying by trait kind:

 * `slot` / `const` : `slotid` (unsigned integer), `type` (multiname), `value`
 * `class` : `slotid`, `class` (the actual class block)
 * `function` : `slotid`, `method` (the actual method block)
 * `method` / `getter` / `setter` : `dispid` (unsigned integer), `method`

Additionally, all traits may have `flag` fields, describing the trait's 
attributes (`FINAL` / `OVERRIDE` / `METADATA`), and `metadata` blocks.

`metadata` blocks (which are ignored by the AVM) consist of a name string, and 
a series of `item` fields - each item having a key and value string.

`class` blocks have mandatory `instance` and `cinit` fields, defining the 
class instance and the class initializer method respectively. They may also 
have `trait` fields and a `refid` field (the `refid` field is not part of the 
file format - it's an unique string to allow referencing the class, see above).

`instance` blocks - always declared inline of their `class` block - must 
contain one `iinit` field (the instance initializer method), and may contain 
one `extends` field (multiname), `implements` fields (multinames), `flag` 
fields (`SEALED` / `FINAL` / `INTERFACE` / `PROTECTEDNS`), one `protectedns` 
field (namespace), and `trait` fields.

`method` blocks may contain one `name` field (multiname), a `refid` field, 
`param` fields (multinames - this represents the parameter types), one 
`returns` field (multiname), `flag` fields (`NEED_ARGUMENTS` / 
`NEED_ACTIVATION` / `NEED_REST` / `HAS_OPTIONAL` / `SET_DXNS` / 
`HAS_PARAM_NAMES`), `optional` fields (values), `paramname` fields (strings), 
and a `body` field (method body).

`body` blocks - always declared inline of their `method` block - must contain 
the `maxstack`, `localcount`, `initscopedepth` and `maxscopedepth` fields 
(unsigned integers), and a `code` field. It may also contain `try` and `trait` 
fields.

`code` blocks - always declared inline of their `body` block - are somewhat 
different in syntax from other blocks - mostly in that they may contain 
labels. Labels follow the most common syntax - a word followed by a `:` 
character, optionally followed by a relative byte offset (in case of pointers 
inside instructions). Multiple instruction arguments are comma-separated. 
Instruction arguments' types depend on the instruction - see the `OpcodeInfo` 
array in `abcfile.d` for a reference.

`try` blocks - always declared inline of their `body` block - represent an 
"exception" (try/catch) block. They contain five mandatory fields: `from`, 
`to` and `target` (names of labels representing start and end of the "try" 
block, and start of the "catch" block respectively), and `type` and `name` 
(multinames), representing the type and name of the exception variable.

Values have the syntax *type* `(` *value* `)` . *type* can be one of 
`Integer`, `UInteger`, `Double`, `Utf8`, `Namespace`, `PackageNamespace`, 
`PackageInternalNs`, `ProtectedNamespace`, `ExplicitNamespace`, 
`StaticProtectedNs`, `PrivateNamespace`, `True`, `False`, `Null` or 
`Undefined`. The type of the value depends on *type*. Types `True`, `False`, 
`Null` and `Undefined` have no value.

Constants
---------

Multinames have the syntax *type* `(` *parameters* `)` . *type* can be one of 
`QName` / `QNameA`, `RTQName` / `RTQNameA`, `RTQNameL` / `RTQNameLA`, 
`Multiname` / `MultinameA`, `MultinameL` / `MultinameLA`, or `TypeName`. 
*parameters* depends on *type*:

 * `QName` / `QNameA` `(` *namespace* `,` *string* `)`
 * `RTQName` / `RTQNameA` `(` *string* `)`
 * `RTQNameL` / `RTQNameLA` `(` `)`
 * `Multiname` / `MultinameA` `(` *string* `,` *namespace-set* `)`
 * `MultinameL` / `MultinameLA` `(` *namespace-set* `)`
 * `TypeName` `(` *multiname* `<` *multiname [* `,` *multiname ... ]* `>` `)`

Namespace sets have the syntax `[` *[ namespace [* `,` *namespace ... ] ]* `]` 
(that is, a comma-separated list of namespaces in square brackets). Empty 
namespace sets can be specified using `[]`.

Namespaces have the syntax *type* `(` *string [* `,` *string ]* `)` . The 
first string indicates the namespace name. In the case that there are multiple 
distinct namespaces with the same type and name (as `PrivateNamespace` 
namespaces usually are), a second parameter may be present to uniquely 
distinguish them. Internally (the ABC file format), namespaces are 
distinguished by their numerical index. When disassembling, `rabcdasm` will 
attempt to assign descriptive labels to homonym namespaces based on their 
context.

Strings have a syntax similar to C string literals. Strings start and end with 
a `"`. Supported escape sequences (a backslash followed by a letter) are `\n` 
(generates ASCII 0x0A), `\r` (ASCII 0x0D), and `\x` followed by two 
hexadecimal digits, which inserts the ASCII character with that code. Any 
other characters following a backslash generate that character - thus, you can 
escape backslashes using `\\` and double quotes using `\"`. When decompiling, 
high-ASCII characters (usually UTF-8) are not escaped - if you see gibberish 
instead of international text, configure your editor to open the files in 
UTF-8 encoding.

Additionally, constant pool types (signed/unsigned integers, doubles, strings, 
namespaces, namespace sets and multinames) may also have the value `null` 
(which represents the index 0 in the ABC file). Note that `null` is 
conceptually different from zero, an empty string or empty namespace set.

Macros
------

RABCDAsm has some basic macro-like capabilities, controlled by directives and 
variables. These bear some similarity to the C preprocessor, however these are 
processed in-loop rather than as a separate pre-processing step.

### Directives

Directives start with a `#`, followed by a word identifying the directive:

  * `#include` *string* - inserts the contents of the file by the specified 
    filename inline. Functionally equivalent to `#mixin #get` *string* , but 
    faster.
  * `#mixin` *string* - inserts the contents of the specified string inline. 
    Not very useful on its own.
  * `#call` *string* `(` *[ string [* `,` *string ... ] ]* `)` - same as 
    `#mixin`, however it additionally sets the special variables `$1`, `$2` 
    etc. to the contents of the specified arguments. When the end of the 
    inserted string is reached, the old values of `$1`, `$2` etc. are restored.
  * `#get` *string* - inserts **a string containing** the contents of the file 
    by the specified filename inline. Similar to #include, but it inserts a 
    string (surrounded by `"` etc.) instead.
  * `#set` *word* *string* - assigns the contents of the string to the 
    variable *word*.
  * `#unset` *word* - deletes the variable *word*.
  * `#privatens` *number* *string* - deprecated, currently ignored.
  * `#version` specifies the syntax version of the disassembly. Newer RABCDAsm 
    versions may emit disassembly output that is not backwards-compatible, but 
    should still understand older disassemblies. The versions are:
     1. The first version.
     2. Introduced in v1.11 to work around error in ABC format specification.
     3. Introduced in v1.12 to support multiple non-private namespaces with 
        the same name. This is the current version.

### Variables

Variables are manipulated with the `#set` and `#unset` directives, and can be 
instantiated in two ways:

  1. `$`*name* - this inserts the contents of the variable inline. Note that 
     although variables are defined using a string syntax, they are not 
     inserted as a string using this syntax. Thus, the code:

        #set str "Hello, world!"
        ...
        pushstring $str

     will expand to `pushstring Hello, world!`, which will result in an error.
     To correct the problem, add escaped quotes around the variable contents
     ( `#set str "\"Hello, world!\""` ), or use the second syntax:
  
  2. `$"`*name*`"` - this inserts a string containing the contents of the 
     variable inline. This syntax also works for `#call` arguments (e.g. 
     `$"1"`).

### Example

Here's an example of how to use the above features to create a macro which 
logs a string literal and the contents of a register:

    #set log "
        findpropstrict      QName(PackageNamespace(\"\"), \"log\")
        pushstring          $\"1\"
        getlocal            $2
        callpropvoid        QName(PackageNamespace(\"\"), \"log\"), 2
    "
    
    ; ...
    
    pushbyte 2
    pushbyte 2
    add_i
    setlocal1
    #call $"log"("two plus two equals", "1")
     
Highlighting
------------

Included with the project is the file `asasm.hrc`, a simple syntax definition 
for the [Colorer take5][] syntax highlighting library. It should be 
straight-forward to adapt it to other syntax highlighting systems.

  [Colorer take5]: http://colorer.sourceforge.net/

Hacking
=======

ABC is internally represented in two forms. The `ABCFile` class stores the raw 
data structures, as they appear in the binary file. `ASProgram` uses pointers 
instead of indexes, allowing easy manipulation without having to worry about 
record order or constant pools. Conversion between various states is done as 
follows:

                                 file.abc
                                   |  ^
                  ------ ABCReader |  | ABCWriter ----
                 /                 v  |               \
                /                ABCFile               \
               /                   |  ^                 \
        rabcdasm---------- ABCtoAS |  | AStoABC --------rabcasm
               \                   v  |                 /
                \               ASProgram              /
                 \                 |  ^               /
                  --- Disassembler |  | Assembler ----
                                   v  |
                                file.asasm

`AStoABC` will rebuild the constant pools, in a manner similar to Adobe's 
compilers (reverse-sorted by reference count). The exact order will almost 
surely be different, however.

Should you need to write an utility to manipulate ABC, you can use the 
existing code to load the file to either an `ABCFile` or `ASProgram` instance, 
and perform the necessary manipulations using those classes.

Tips
====

The following tips come from the author's experience and may be useful for 
RABCDAsm users.

1. Once you have disassembled a SWF file you intend to modify, you should 
   immediately add the directory to a distributed source control system, such 
   as [Git][] or [Mercurial][]. This will allow you to easily track and undo 
   your changes, and easily merge your changes with new versions of SWF files.

  [Git]: http://git-scm.com/
  [Mercurial]: http://mercurial.selenic.com/

2. If you plan on making non-trivial changes to SWF files, you should install 
   the [debug Flash Player][]. This will allow you to see validation and 
   run-time error messages, instead of simply getting an empty window.

  [debug Flash Player]: http://www.adobe.com/support/flashplayer/downloads.html

3. The [Fiddler][] Web Debugging Proxy can be very useful for analyzing 
   websites with SWF content. The following script fragment (which is to be 
   placed in the `OnBeforeResponse` function) will automatically save all SWF 
   files while preserving the directory structure.

        if (oSession.oResponse.headers.ExistsAndContains("Content-Type",
                "application/x-shockwave-flash")) {
            // Set desired path here
            var path:String = "C:\\Temp\\FiddlerCapture\\" +
                oSession.host + oSession.PathAndQuery;
            if (path.Contains('?'))
                path = path.Substring(0, path.IndexOf('?'));
            var dir:String = Path.GetDirectoryName(path);
            if (!Directory.Exists(dir))
                Directory.CreateDirectory(dir);
            oSession.utilDecodeResponse();
            oSession.SaveResponseBody(path);
        }

   A more robust version of the above snippet is available as a Fiddler plugin 
   [here][FiddlerAutoCapture].

   Once you have edited a SWF file, you can use Fiddler's [AutoResponder][] to 
   replace the original file with your modified version.

  [Fiddler]: http://www.fiddler2.com/fiddler2/
  [AutoResponder]: http://www.fiddler2.com/fiddler2/help/AutoResponder.asp
  [FiddlerAutoCapture]: https://github.com/CyberShadow/FiddlerAutoCapture

Limitations
===========

* None known.

License
=======

RABCDAsm is distributed under the terms of the GPL v3 or later, with the 
exception of `murmurhash2a.d`, `zlibx.d` and LZMA components, which are in the 
public domain, and `asasm.hrc`, which is tri-licensed under the MPL 1.1/GPL 
2.0/LGPL 2.1. The full text of the GNU General Public License can be found in 
the file `COPYING`.
